Dis-Chem downplayed the National
Union of Public Service and Allied Workers (Nupsaw) wage strike on Friday, saying that a small percentage of employees were participating from the
company’s distribution centres, and the industrial action was being undertaken
as an "opportunistic membership drive" ahead of the festive season. Nupsaw’s Solly Malema said the union, on day one of the strike, had
shut the Mall of Africa branch, several unnamed shops in the Free State and the
Western Cape and the Midrand and Delmas distribution centres. "This is not correct. The Dis-Chem in Mall of Africa was closed
for a brief period today to ensure the safety of our staff and customers. The
Midrand Distribution Centre is operating on skeleton staff. All areas of the
business are operational," Caryn Barker said in an emailed response to Fin24. This is the third strike the JSE-listed pharmaceutical chain has
faced this year, with Nupsaw downing tools in January and rival union and
Congress of South African Trade Union (Cosatu) affiliate the South
African Commercial, Catering and Allied Workers Union (Saccawu) embarking on
industrial action in June. Salaries revised in March Barker said Dis-Chem was not in negotiations with any of the union, as no labour organisation has sufficient representation, while salaries are
revised in March and are dependent on company performance and the consumer
price index (CPI). Malema accused the company, which operates
just over 100 stores nationwide, of failing to process their membership
numbers on the payroll, and said the union was demanding R12 500 minimum
monthly salaries and guaranteed bonuses for staff members. "Dis-Chem has made it clear
that the wage demands are unreasonable given the current economic climate and
that they would severely impact the company’s future operations," said Barker. Nupsaw blamed the company for "apartheid and draconian" conditions on the shop floor, saying workers are
barred from switching on their cell phones. Barker said this was a security measure in place, as
crime syndicates have in the past used cell phones to track the location of
staff inside the distribution centres and the company has systems in
place to relay emergency messages to them. Lebogang Phanyeko, national organiser for Nupsaw’s mother body,
the South African Federation of Trade Unions (Saftu), vowed to intensify
the strike in the coming days with the support of other affiliates. Dis-Chem’s share price on the JSE was down 1.08% to R31.11
at 14.30 on Friday. * Sign up to Fin24's top news in your inbox: SUBSCRIBE TO FIN24 NEWSLETTER