According to the Harvard
Business Review, the average business spends three times more on
their sales training and sales enablement than they do on their media spend or
marketing efforts. This means companies are spending far more on enabling
sales people to do their jobs more effectively, and far less on creating demand
for their product or service in the first place. While no one can deny that training sales staff
is crucial, it seems not enough money is being spent on making sure sales
people have "chemistry" with their sales prospects. Because, after all, no matter how good your
sales technique is, people buy from people – and more importantly, from people
they like. So the real question is: how can your business
train and enable salespeople to make real connections with their prospects, and
then arm them with collateral that enhances that chemistry and connection? Here
are the three steps your business needs to take. Step 1: Start with
anthropology. In this first step, you find out what really makes your prospect tick. Say for example you’re trying to sell software
to the CTO of a large corporate. If you start your sales conversation around
how your technology can solve their problems, you’re not differentiating
yourself. But if you use anthropology, you may discover
that CTOs have a genuine fear of irrelevance in that from a tech point of view,
most of them are preoccupied with ensuring their company is still around in 10
years’ time. Understanding this underlying fear around
relevance means you can understand them on a human level, and then tap into
this. Armed with this insight, you can rather start the sales conversation in a
way that directly addresses this underlying fear. Step 2: Make sure your
sales collateral speaks effectively to your prospects. In most sales scenarios, a salesperson will
have something they leave behind after meeting with their prospect, such as a
brochure, or an object like a pen or USB drive branded with their company’s
logo. In the CTO example above, this may mean leaving
a brochure showing images of the technology you’re selling. But again, this
material doesn’t speak to the CTO’s underlying fear of irrelevance. This could translate into leaving behind a well
thought out piece of content showing research of how to stay technologically
relevant. If this is the case, all of a sudden the collateral becomes much more
effective, because it speaks more personally to the type of person being sold
to. Step 3: Align
marketing and sales Traditionally, sales and marketing departments operated
in silos. If things went wrong, marketing people would blame sales people for
wasting leads – or sales people blamed marketing people for not creating them
in the first place. But to be effective, sales and marketing should
be completely aligned and have a symbiotic relationship. After all, if
marketing is generating the right kind of demand, and sales is able to turn
that demand into business, sales commissions and budgets grow – because sales
are happening more effectively. That’s why these days, marketing plays a much
greater role in nurturing sales leads to become more than just marketing
qualified leads. Only once a lead becomes a sales qualified lead does the
marketing department hand it over to the sales team to close it. While there can be no doubt as to the
importance of a sales department, the fact is that it’s not just salespeople
who are involved in an organisation’s sales process. If you have a marketing campaign that creates
awareness, which in turn is created through chemistry between a potential
prospect and your brand, your salesperson can then close that loop by
continuing on that chemistry. If that happens, the chances of a sale being
closed is much higher - because there is consistency and feeling in the
marketing campaign. Using the three steps outlined above, this becomes highly
achievable. Warren Moss is the CEO
of Demographica. * Sign up to Fin24's top news in
your inbox: SUBSCRIBE
TO FIN24 NEWSLETTER