South Africa's laws, policies and regulations must
open the country to investment, President Cyril Ramaphosa said on Tuesday. He spoke at a media briefing in Cape Town along
with German Federal President Frank-Walter Steinmeier, who is on a state visit
to SA. "When international investors look at South
Africa, they must see that it is a good place for investment," said
Ramaphosa. "I appreciate the useful discussions we are
having on SA's strategic relationship with Germany. SA welcomes this
opportunity to renew the bonds between our two countries at political, trade
and investment level. We will increase our efforts to grow trade between our
two countries." Germany has more than 600 companies operating in
SA, providing more than 100 000 jobs. Both Ramaphosa and Steinmeier believe
this can help grow the economic relationship between the two countries and increase
investment in SA. SA 'important investment destination' Ramaphosa said that on a recent visit to Berlin, he
saw that SA was seen as a "very important investment destination" by
German companies. Steinmeier brought along a business delegation, and
opportunities in SA would be showcased to them, Ramaphosa said. He also praised German companies operating in SA
for driving skills development among young South Africans. "We can learn from the German approach of
using a theoretical learning process coupled with practical vocational
training," said Ramaphosa. "The aim is to drive sustainable investment in
SA." Steinmeier said his visit to SA comes at a time
when there is renewed interest in SA. "We in Germany follow the new developments in
SA closely, especially the efforts to strengthen judicial independence and
efforts to fight state capture. Those are very important signals to the
international community and SA has to confront these huge expectations,"
he said. "German companies are sometimes slow to
invest, but once they invest they do so in a sustainable manner. We will
explore opportunities to get German companies interested to have the courage to
invest in SA." He said members of the business delegation would be
checking if the investment climate in SA had improved and whether it was
conducive to doing business. To this, Ramaphosa said SA had embarked on a
journey of renewal to instil confidence, not only in its own people, but also
among international investors. * Sign up to Fin24's top news in your inbox: SUBSCRIBE TO
FIN24 NEWSLETTER  