While
you read this article, over 50 people globally
would have died from diseases linked to unsafe drinking water. Access to potable water (also called safe drinking water)
is a
basic human right. Humanity is, however, facing a significant decline in the
quantity and quality of available fresh water. The harmful effects of water
crises on human health and economic activity are widespread and likely to
increase in future. The problem could be partly addressed by recycling
more wastewater, building desalination plants and investing in rainwater
harvesting infrastructure. As elsewhere in the world, many
South Africans do
not have ‘acceptable access’ to potable water.
Acceptable access can be measured in terms of distance, availability and
quality. The
infrastructure necessary to make potable water available to domestic users
(e.g. dams, filtration plants, pipes) is,
however, costly to build and maintain. Although the South African
government is primarily responsible for providing this public good, private
sector investment is urgently needed to alleviate some of the pressure that the
Department of Water and Sanitation faces. The recent drought in some provinces
left many citizens extremely concerned about access to drinking water.
Furthermore, there is a high probability of increased water shortages in
South Africa as the population continues to grow and as the impact of climate
change intensifies. Impact investing provides a possible solution. It has been described as a responsible investment
approach where investors seek to create a measurable social or environmental
impact while generating financial return. The impact investment market in South Africa has grown steadily in
recent years and could be used in tandem with government funds to address the large
and growing water infrastructure funding gap. Scholars have estimated that investment in certain
segments of the water sector can be expected to generate annualised returns of
between 5% and 10% until 2030. Institutional investors who devote capital
towards water purification infrastructure have the opportunity to create
significant impact in these areas. Alongside the financial returns, the social and
environmental advantages of water infrastructure investments include health
benefits, education gains, increased productivity, food security and a better
quality of life. Hurdles There are, however, some concerns that have been
raised regarding barriers to investments in South Africa’s water purification
infrastructure. A review of the literature shows that these include the
possibility of political interference and the lack of skilled personnel. Water
contracts and regulatory agreements are susceptible to political re-interpretation
and interference. Furthermore, many municipalities responsible for water
provision are ineffective due to in-fighting, corruption and inappropriate
appointments. Another barrier is the financial risks linked to the
affordability of water and when potable water becomes too expensive for the
poor. High rates of poverty manifests itself in the inability to pay for water
services and other basic needs. Another contributing factor to higher financial
risk is the high initial costs of water infrastructure. Make it rain Unless these barriers are properly
understood and overcome, the funding gap will keep increasing due to a lack of
private sector investment. Given the urgent need to address the status quo in
South Africa, we set out to investigate the role that the impact investors
could play in the local water sector. We interviewed 20 experts who confirmed
that there is definitely potential to make social and environmental impact by
addressing the funding gap and providing water infrastructure in areas of rapid
population growth. They also commented that there are opportunities to provide
basic goods and services to an untapped market at the bottom-of-the-pyramid. According to these experts, the best
opportunities are found by investing in a convergence of sectors though
innovative technologies in water purification technology. Contrary to the
negative perception regarding private sector involvement, there were fairly positive
reactions to public-private partnerships and how they could be leveraged to
address challenges. The possibility of political
interference remained a primary barrier for most of the interviewees. Contrary
to the good return prospects in the literature, the local experts revealed that
the current tariff structure in South Africa does not align with the financial
returns described previously. This barrier was connected with the difficulty of
establishing an affordable price that does not exploit end users, but also
generates good financial return. Two additional barriers that emerged
were the complex deal structuring due to the large number of stakeholder
engagement needed and the lack of investment-ready deals. The large public funding gap and the
lack of capacity are evidence that government needs assistance to address the
difficulties related to the provision, development and maintenance of our
country’ water infrastructure. We recommend that more
public-private-partnerships should be used in developing countries more often
to combat, among others, inefficient and expensive infrastructure development
and maintenance. The possibility of government
subsidisation in rural areas should be considered to decrease the complexity of
deal structuring in impact investing in water purification infrastructure and
the low financial return expectations. Such subsidisation could counter the
low water tariff recovery rates, paving the way for more investment
opportunities. Impact investing in South Africa is booming, which provides a
powerful platform through which very tangible problems can be addressed. *Steve McCallum & Suzette Viviers are academics in the Department
of Business Management at Stellenbosch University. McCallum completed his MCom
on the topic of private sector impact investing in water purification
infrastructure in South Africa in 2017. *
Sign up to Fin24's top news in your inbox: SUBSCRIBE TO FIN24
NEWSLETTER