The Department of Energy is to be
commended on a draft Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) 2018 that is a significant
improvement on its predecessor. These improvements include the increased
allocation to renewable energy, the revised demand forecasts, the phasing out
of coal and the pursuit of the ‘least cost option’ which rules out nuclear at
least until 2030. 
However, some fundamental
strategic concerns remain. The
lack of long-term, strategic thinking underpinning the document is cause for
worry. This relates to failure to acknowledge that coal mining is a sunset
industry in South Africa that has been shedding jobs for years, and a sector that
is facing challenges and crises
due to increased costs, energy security risk, export demand risk, and low local
demand risk. The coal goal This
is not a uniquely South African phenomenon. New investment in coal is
attracting negative sentiment worldwide and coal is increasingly unattractive
to global investors. Earlier this month, World Bank President Jim Yong Kim pulled
out of a 500 MW power plant in
Kosovo, saying that the World Bank’s rules required
them to "go with the lowest-cost option, and renewables have now come
below the cost of coal ... so without question we are not going to [support the
plant]". The
IRP 2018 does not factor in the profound shift in global investment from coal
towards renewable energy, and fails to provide us with an ambitious pathway away
from coal and other fossil fuels. Falling behind the global renewable energy
transition has far-reaching implications for South Africa’s ability to remain
relevant and competitive in global markets. To
remain competitive, South Africa should factor in the following four globally
interconnected shifts in an IRP: the declining cost of and increasing
investments in renewable energy technologies; energy transition preparedness
amongst countries; climate change imperatives; and, the decline of coal. Renewable
energy is, increasingly, cheaper and more financially attractive. In 2017, a record 157 GW of renewable power
(excluding hydro) were commissioned globally compared to the net fossil fuel
generating addition of 70GW. More
capacity addition was made in solar (98 GW) than in coal. Investments of $279.8
billion were made globally in renewable energy. Just over half of these
investments were in China, Brazil, and India. Apart from diversifying the
energy mix, these investments also support increased renewable energy
technologies manufacturing and job creation. Essentially,
progressive countries are preparing the groundwork for an energy transition
away from coal to attract new investments, strengthen competitiveness and harness
the limited raw materials required to manufacture these clean technologies. The
World Bank estimates
that limiting global temperature rise to 2°C above pre-industrial level would
mean that demand for key metals needed for producing wind technologies would
increase by 250% and for solar photovoltaics by 300%. Policy decisions are
expected to trigger cost reductions in renewable energy technologies and
simultaneously increase the competition for raw material needed to produce wind
and solar power. SA lags behind Unfortunately,
South Africa is ill-prepared for these changes. According
to the Energy Transition Index,
we are ranked 113 out of 114 countries in terms of energy transition
preparedness. The Index argues that given the high level of uncertainty
involved in the energy sector, countries must build in flexibility within their
electricity systems. Here, on a score of 0-100, South Africa scores a meagre 0.5
– making it the least flexible electricity system in the world. Any
large-scale, single-point source investments in our energy infrastructure will
further reinforce this inflexibility. Already the World Energy Council (WEC) in
its Energy Trilemma Index 2017
placed South Africa as one of the four countries on its negative watch list – meaning
it is one of the countries "likely to experience significant [negative]
changes … in their trilemma index performance in
the near future". A
fundamental consideration for a country’s future planning in all economic
sectors today is the threat posed by climate change. Early this month, the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) released its special report – Global Warming of 1.5°C. Using
the latest science, the report stresses the need for supporting economy-wide
transformation by means of just transitions that enable us to remain consistent
with a 1.5°C world. According
to the report "Countries in the tropics and Southern Hemisphere subtropics
are projected to experience the largest impacts on economic growth due to climate
change should global warming increase from 1.5°C to 2°C." It is therefore
in South Africa’s interest that temperature rise is limited to 1.5°C. And a world consistent with 1.5°C means a
world where ‘renewables are projected to supply 70-85% of electricity in 2050 …
while the use of coal shows a steep reduction in all pathways and would be
reduced to close to 0% (0-2%) of electricity.’ To
remain competitive and comply with its international climate obligations in
terms of the country’s international commitments through its Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs), South Africa needs to move away from coal in
the electricity sector and the liquid fuels sector fast and at scale. A
recent report, "Coal
Transitions in South Africa", indicates that any new coal-fired
power stations will not be consistent with the lower range of South Africa’s
NDCs.  Moreover, including new plants or
extending the lives of older plants in the IRP, will not only prevent achieving
the low range of the Peak-Plateau-Decline trajectory (398 Mt CO2-eq in
2025-2030), but has the potential to raise greenhouse gases to a level that exceeds the upper range of the NDC
in 2025. New
coal also poses a large financial liability, including the two new coal IPPs in
the energy mix, which will increase the net present value of the total system
costs by R20bn. Not enough As
it is, South Africa’s NDCs international commitments are not enough. An
important policy decision to align them with our fair share would be not to make
any new investments in fossil-fuel technologies and rather increase investments
in renewable energy. Although
the draft IRP could bring it close to meeting the upper range of its 2030 NDC
target, South Africa’s NDC target still remains "highly insufficient".
The country has to adopt more ambitious targets to achieve a just transition
such as ramping up renewable energy capacity substantially, both until and beyond
2030, phasing out coal, substantially limiting natural gas use by 2050, as well
as work on improving efficiency in all economic sectors. If
these measures are not urgently incorporated in the IRP, South Africa will
become increasingly uncompetitive, unattractive to foreign direct investment
and increasingly isolated both within and beyond the energy sector. Continuing
to remain invested in coal will not only entrench inflexibility in our energy
system, but will also be a lost opportunity to send positive signals to
institutional investors who are already starting to make "partial or complete divestments"
from coal in light of potential reputational damage. The
future is coming, whether we are prepared or not. And as the findings of IPCC’s
special report on global warming of 1.5C underline – we had better be prepared. *
Sign up to Fin24's top news in your inbox: SUBSCRIBE TO FIN24
NEWSLETTER