As people
across South Africa question whether there will be load shedding in the coming
months and years, others are in the unenviable position of not having ready
access to power. Necessity
is the mother of invention, and where services are not widely available, many
small businesses are stepping up to fill the gap. One of the
innovations hoping to do so is a new version of the SolarTurtle - an
award-winning solar energy hub developed by Cape Town engineer James van der
Walt and his team, which is being unveiled at the Home of Compassion in Delft,
Cape Town at the end of June. The Home
of Compassion – which has the aim of eradicating unemployment and illiteracy
through skills and awareness programmes – is the brainchild of Charles and
Delecia George, who have been working in the Western Cape since 1993. Neat, safe and secure As for the
SolarTurtle, the latest version of the container-based energy kiosk features
automated solar panels that deploy and fold away automatically for transport,
or if there is any kind of threat, like wind storms, protests or anything else.
Like the Transformers from the big screen, it transforms at the click of a
button into a neat, safe and secure button. It retreats like a turtle into its
shell – hence the name SolarTurtle. The
purpose of  these solar energy hubs is to
provide secure, reliable green power to communities in areas that otherwise
have little access to electricity due to any number of reasons, such as rural
location, limited infrastructure or social issues such as crime. Van der
Walt describes SolarTurtle as a "social business" that uses the power
of renewable energy to empower those who need it most. By creating safe spaces
to work from, he explains, these energy hubs "ignite the potential"
that is otherwise locked away. "Our new Turtle design is unique and is
very much a home-grown South African innovation," he says. The
Turtle's purpose-built mounting system allows the solar panels to fold away
snugly onto the roof of the container, meaning users can deploy the container
anywhere and move it again the following day if need be. This means it can be
used in emergencies or during disaster recovery, where access to power is
crucial.  Social business According
to Van der Walt, his vision is also to use the Turtle for drop 'n go clinics,
ICT labs or rural offices. The team is working on a large project for Lesotho
and is building a prototype for a community centre in Delft, Cape Town, he
says, where the container will be used as a solar battery charging station for
phones. It will also be used for a tailoring business. The power
from the sun will also flow into the rest of the community centre, reducing
reliance on Eskom, says Lungelwa Tyali, the organisation's general manager. The new
version of the SolarTurtle, like its predecessor, aims to address a need. One
of the changes introduced is an automated system, which builds on the lessons
learnt during a pilot of the SolarTurtle deployed at a rural school in the
Eastern Cape. Here, the
first container served as a publicly owned energy kiosk. Learners from the
school were able to charge their phones, buy and use internet vouchers and
access rechargeable LED lights for studying. Lessons learnt In 2016,
the school where the pilot was hosted was annexed by an angry mob protesting
against lack of services in the area, Tyali says. The ladies working in the
container energy kiosk had no time to use the original, manual system to fold
away the panels. So they simply locked themselves inside the container and
waited. During the
course of the protest, the solar panels – which aren't cheap – were exposed to
rocks, fires and other hazards. The situation ultimately was resolved
peacefully. But a lesson was learnt: it was clear there was room for an
automated system. Enter the
new design, which reduced costs and complexity of the system, and improved
security and mobility. The
SolarTurtle team say they are hoping to serve many more off-grid communities
with safe, secure and easily accessible power. Innovations
like the SolarTurtle stem from entrepreneurs identifying a social or societal
need, and developing products and solutions to meet that need. As a nation with
good infrastructure and access to decent education at a tertiary level (albeit
expensive), we are well poised to make a shift from our traditional economic
anchors of mining and related sectors, to a more knowledge-based economy. Small
businesses are leading the way in this innovation space, driven by social
entrepreneurs like Van der Walt, and they may just hold the key to unlocking
our rich potential and addressing the socio-economic challenges that neither
'big business' nor government seem able to. * To learn more about the new SolarTurtle offering, register for the technical tour at the IEEE Power Africa conference, or pop in from 10am-1pm at the Home of Compassion in
Delft. To learn more about SolarTurtle and their portable energy product range,
visit www.solarturtle.co.za  or email James Van
der Walt at james@solarturtle.co.za * Anton Ressel is a business strategist, social commentator and writer. He is a director of the Fetola Foundation and founder and director of ARC Consulting, a small business specialist agency that offers mentorship, support and other services to entrepreneurs and emerging businesses nationally. * Sign up to Fin24's top news in your inbox: SUBSCRIBE TO FIN24 NEWSLETTER