With four out of 10 marriages in SA ending in divorce before their tenth
anniversary, it is crucial spouses plan ahead to safeguard their assets. According to Kobus van Schalkwyk, Head of Corporate Development at Standard
Trust Limited: Standard Bank Wealth, while marriages are entered into with the
best intentions, it is a sad reality that close to half of unions end in
divorce. “It is important that couples go into a marriage with their eyes wide
open and that they can and should protect their assets well before a marriage
potentially ends. While most do not even want to contemplate anything but
marital bliss until ‘death us do part’, it is very important to be practical
and have a plan that ensures your legacy and the interests of your family are
well protected,” says Mr van Schalkwyk. An ante-nuptial contract, for instance, can be drawn up to allow for any
growth of each spouse’s separate estates during the marriage to be shared
equally on death or divorce. While marriages without an ante-nuptial contract
are automatically in community of property, a marriage can also be out of
community of property without accrual through drawing up an ante-nuptial
contract whereby the parties set out the rules and conditions in respect of the
division of assets. “Another way to ensure a better outcome for married couples is to set up
a spousal trust in a will. This is a good way to avoid a surviving spouse
changing his or her will to dis-inherit people who may have been important to
the deceased,” says Mr van Schalkwyk. The spousal trust would have been set up in such a way that the trust –
rather than the survivor – owns the will maker’s assets until the trust
terminates. “If drafted properly this ensures that the survivor can benefit from the
interest and income from the trust property while he or she is still alive,”
explains Mr van Schalkwyk. While a spousal trust or any other mechanism may have been used to
protect individual assets, the Maintenance of Surviving Spouses Act still gives
the surviving spouse a claim against the estate of the deceased spouse for
reasonable maintenance needs until his or her death or remarriage insofar as he
or she is unable to provide for such needs from own means. “A number of considerations would be taken into account to determine
reasonable maintenance needs, including the length of the marriage, the
standard of living of the survivor during the marriage, the financial needs and
obligations of the survivor, the survivor’s age and the amount available in the
deceased estate available for distribution to heirs and legatees. However, the
survivor’s own means and earning capacity have to be taken into consideration as
well before any valid claim can be made against the deceased spouse’s estate,”
says Mr van Schalkwyk. With divorce rates on the rise, it is very important to regularly update
a will whenever there is a change in the status of one’s family. For instance, very few testators are aware that his or her subsequent
spouses and children or any other child subsequently born to the deceased after
a previous marriage was dissolved by divorce or annulment could be disinherited
if a new will has not been drawn up, or an existing will amended, within three
months of the divorce. “This is because the Wills Act only allows for a ‘temporary revocation’
of any benefit to a previously divorced spouse in a will for three months after
the date of the divorce. If no new will had been drawn up within three months
of the divorce a previous spouse could inherit and any new spouse and children may
be disinherited, which could and often does have devastating consequences,”
says Mr van Schalkwyk. The Marriages and Divorces report released by Statistics South Africa
this year shows that four in ten divorces (44,4%) of the 25 326 in 2016 were
marriages that lasted for less than 10 years. Divorces increased from 21 998 in
2012 to 25 326 in 2016, and constitute an increase of 0,3% from the 25 260
divorces granted in 2015. According to the report, Western Cape had the highest number of divorces
granted with a total of 6 224 (24,6%), followed by Gauteng with 5 816 (23,0%),
KwaZulu-Natal with 4 314 (17,0%) and Eastern Cape with 3 352 (13,2%). The
report further shows that, irrespective of population group, a higher
proportion (26,9%) of divorces came from marriages that lasted 5 to 9 years. In
2016, 13 922 (55,0%) divorce cases involved children aged less than 18 years. “It is clear you need to give effect to your intentions while you are
still alive or else it can go horribly wrong. The best solution is to use
trusted partners to ensure all your interests are taken care of, trustees and
executors are in place you trust and understand you and your family’s needs and
have their welfare at heart and most importantly, that you regularly review
your will to make sure your legacy and the interests of your loved ones are
safeguarded,” says Mr van Schalkwyk. This post and content
is sponsored, written and provided by Standard Bank. 