Ideas, and the people that give birth to
them, shape our future. So with this final issue of 2018, let us look at five
young economists, and their ideas at the frontiers of the field, that will
shape our lives, consciously or otherwise, in 2019 and beyond. One of the most vexing questions social
scientists grapple with is how to build a society where everyone has an equal
opportunity of reaching the top. Inequality is not in itself unfair: we all
know that rare skills, like those possessed by soccer star Lionel Messi or
Tesla founder Elon Musk, should be rewarded better. But what we deem unfair is
when someone with those skills or abilities cannot, for whatever reason,
realise their potential. In the US, as in South Africa, there are
too many children without equal opportunities for success. How to give these
children better chances of succeeding is, in short, the research programme of Raj
Chetty, professor of economics at Harvard University and director of US think
tank Opportunity Insights. Somewhat of a child prodigy, receiving his
PhD from Harvard in 2003 (at the age of 23), his most recent project, together
with several other colleagues, uses big data to map the US neighbourhoods that
offer children the best chances of climbing the income ladder. Their freely
available interactive mapping tool shows how outcomes like poverty and
incarceration can be traced back to the neighbourhoods in which children grew
up. It also helps to develop customised solutions that will improve the
outcomes of children in those “bad” neighbourhoods. One of Chetty’s younger colleagues is Melissa
Dell. Graduating with a PhD from MIT in 2012 Dell spent time at Harvard and
Stanford before joining Harvard in 2018 as a tenured professor. Dell is
fascinated by the factors that underpin long-run development. For her PhD, she
investigated the Mita – a system of forced labour several hundred years ago –
to assess its persistent effects on levels of Peruvian income today. She has
since worked on the persistent differences between north and south Vietnam, the
long-run effects of the Mexican revolution and the consequences of the Dutch
cultivation system in colonial Java. Dell has a severe visual impairment, yet
this has not prevented her from, aside from asking fascinating research
questions, starting a foundation in Peru or running ultra-long-distance races,
including the Comrades. Claudia Olivetti, professor of economics at
Boston College (with a PhD in 2001 from the University of Pennsylvania), is one
of several scholars who wants to understand which factors prevent women from
entering the labour market, and why they move up the corporate ladder at a
slower pace. Olivetti’s latest research shows that the best thing governments
can do is to spend more on early childhood care and education as this has the
largest improvement in women’s employment rates, salaries and even fertility,
decreasing the gender pay gap. The benefits of more parental leave and
flexible schedules, she finds, are smaller. Why? Because access to good early
childhood caretakers that makes it easier for young mothers to work allows
women to return to the labour market quicker after childbirth, boosting their
lifetime earnings. In short: the policies that matter most to women are those
that help mothers work – not those that help them take breaks from work. This type of research aims to identify
which policies are best in improving the outcomes we hope for. An area where such policies are desperately
needed, in SA and elsewhere, is the health sector. Marcella Alsan, associate professor
of medicine at the Stanford School of Medicine, with a PhD in economics from
Harvard in 2012, plans to do exactly that: use research to identify which
health policies improve health outcomes most. One key concern in health, for example, is
how to get patients to use their prescribed medicine. Alsan, in a new study,
provides one tantalising clue: pair the patients with doctors that share a
similar ethnic background. She and her co-author run an experiment where
several hundred black patients are randomly allocated white and black
physicians. They find that those patients that
consulted a black physician are more likely to ask for preventative services,
particularly if those services are invasive. They argue that this is because of
better communication and trust. The implications are profound: they argue that
more black doctors could reduce cardiovascular mortality by 16 deaths per 100
000 per year, leading to a 19% reduction in the black-white male gap in
cardiovascular mortality. It’s not only human health that is the
subject of economic research. The health of the planet is under threat, with
climate change affecting our sustainable future. Solomon Hsiang, professor of
public policy at UC Berkeley, and principal investigator of the Global Policy
Laboratory (with a PhD in Sustainable Development from Columbia University in
2011) is one of the leading thinkers on the topic. In a recent Science letter, he weighed in
on the ivory-ban discussion. But it is the interactions between the economy and
the ecology that is at the heart of his research. In a 2018 Journal of Economic
Perspectives overview paper, Hsiang urges his fellow economists to take the
lead on climate change research: All climate change forecasts, he says, rely
heavily and directly on economic forecasts for the world. “On timescales of a
half-century or longer, the largest source of uncertainty in climate science is
not physics, but economics.” Johan
Fourie is associate professor in economics at
Stellenbosch University. This
article originally appeared in the 20 December edition of finweek. Buy
and download the magazine here or
subscribe to our newsletter here.