Performance from real estate investment trusts in 2019 is
expected to deliver positive total returns, say analysts, with the coming year forecast
to be better for South African REIT returns overall. This is largely driven by current forward income yield, and
capital returns based on growth in income, according to Catalyst Fund Managers. "We expect the REIT sector to deliver total returns in
line with the historical annualised 10-year total return of 14%," reports
Mvula Seroto, investment analyst at Catalyst. This is based on performance from November 1, 2008, to August
31, 2018. Howard Penny, portfolio manager and analyst for Capricorn
Fund Managers SA, holds a similar outlook, believing 2019 will be a better year
for South African REIT returns overall. "In a steady valuation environment in South Africa, SA
REIT returns could be in double-digit territory, supported by sector
distribution yields of approximately 9%, despite lower distribution growth of
around 4% to 5%," says Penny. Positive prospects Besides positive performance prospects for 2019, factors
that market commentators believe will make SA REITs appealing investments in
the year ahead include improved corporate governance in the sector, its
historically high yields and the good value to be found in the share prices of
many REITs. According to Andrea Taverna-Turisan, SA REIT marketing
committee chair, SA REITs are exposed to the best commercial properties in the
country and, in some instances, offshore. "Their property income is underpinned by lease
agreements with tenants in these property assets. Rentals are contracted and
most escalate at a predetermined rate annually - around 6.5% to 8% in the
current domestic market," explains Taverna-Turisan. Political, economic
outlook According to Anchor Stockbrokers, although South Africa's
economic and political outlook is a potential damper on expectations for 2019, the
long-term forecast remains positive. "We expect listed property to deliver a total return,
made up of share price movement plus distributions, of roughly 13% to 14% per
year over the long term. "Unless South Africa's economic and political outlook
improves substantially in 2019, we expect the total return in 2019 to be
marginally lower than the long-term forecast," notes Wynand Smit, real
estate analyst at Anchor Stockbrokers. Penny notes that yields have historically been high despite the
potentially unfavourable impact of rising interest rates. "Despite a rather treacherous rising global interest
rate environment, historically high yields remain the greatest supportive force
for the sector in 2019 and over the medium term," says Penny. Smit adds that most SA REITs de-rated during 2018, and if
growth expectations start to improve during 2019, the valuations of SA REITs
are compelling.