 Luxury performance car designed for
comfortable long-distance touring, a gran turismo (or grand tourer (GT) for us
English speakers) makes the business of long-range driving satisfying and
effortless. The plush and dynamic BMW 6 Series Gran
Turismo was the perfect pick to traverse the Western Cape’s winding coastal
roads, sweeping mountain bends and long stretches of open road. finweek experienced this trip in one
of the two BMW 6 Series Gran Turismo models on offer in the country; the diesel
version BMW 630d GT. Beemer body The four-door GT has a coupé-like
silhouette, thanks to a longer roofline that swoops down at a sharp angle to a
rear end 64mm lower than its predecessor. BMW’s trademark harmonious design
that includes its signature kidney grille, LED headlights and fog lamps, adorn
the front end. But the audacious concave rear feels slightly at odds with the
rest of the fluid fastback design. A fastback design and automatically
extending rear spoiler speaks of an athletic machine, a look that is enhanced
by BMW’s optional M Sport package. This package adds – at a cost – many
external and interior features. Outfitted with 20-inch Pirelli tyres, large
blue brake calipers and M Sport badges, the test car oozed agility. This 6 Series grand tourer is 150kg lighter
than its predecessor, but at 5 091mm in length (87mm longer than the previous
generation) the BMW 630d GT is no small car. Cabin comfort This cabin was built for driving enjoyment
and comfort, with the driver-focused cockpit featuring leather steering wheel,
ergonomic soft Nappa leather seats, a raised seating position and panorama
glass sunroof. Additional pampering in the form of heated seats and massage
function with eight settings, come at added cost. The driving set-up and infotainment
environment is customisable via the BMW’s iDrive system, operated by means of
either a 10.25-inch user-friendly touchscreen, a controller on the centre
console or via voice control. Gesture control can be added as an optional
extra. As expected from a luxury premium vehicle,
connectivity and infotainment offerings are in abundance, with satnav,
real-time traffic information, a host of smartphone connectivity features
including Apple CarPlay, bluetooth, wireless smartphone charging, USB ports,
stereo system with six speakers and DVD player. Latest advancements towards automated
driving are also to be had. BMW’s Driving Assist option includes active cruise
control with stop-and-go function, steering and lane control assist, lane
change assistant, lane departure warning, collision warning and cross traffic
warning system. Remote control parking using a BMW display key can also be
ordered (and yes, that comes at additional cost). The GT has a EuroNCAP 5-star crash rating.
Standard safety fare includes multiple airbags for both front and rear
passengers, door-integrated side impact protection, and a crash sensor that,
aside from deploying airbags, activates the hazard warning lights, unlocks the
doors and deactivates the fuel pump. Traditional grand tourers are more commonly
two-door coupés with two seats or a 2+2 seating arrangement. But the four-door
BMW 630d GT, with its three full-sized rear seats, can more than comfortably
seat five adults. The amount of legroom in the back is matched only by its 7
Series sibling. Despite the vehicle’s 21mm height reduction
and lowered roofline, rear headroom too is generous. Tablet-sized screens at the back of the front
headrests is an optional feature that makes rear seat entertainment a reality,
while the standard automatic window screens provide shade from the sun or
privacy from external prying eyes for those in the back. No need to travel light in this grand
tourer. The boot, already a generous 610?litres, can be increased to as much as
1 800 litres by folding the rear seats, easily brought about via a remote
release system in the boot. Country cruising This grand tourer may be a diesel, but it’s
the quietest diesel I have ever driven… and I have driven quite a few. It’s
really quiet, both inside and out. Another plus for those who would turn up
their noses at the diesel variant, is its immense range (well north of 1 000km)
and the up to 15% reduction in both fuel consumption and CO2 figures over its
predecessor. Then, of course, there is all that fabulous torque that makes
overtaking – even on the steepest climbs – a doddle. The 630d GT is refined, but dynamic too. It
can effortlessly pilot in gridlock traffic (courtesy of the semi-autonomous
driving features), yet comes into its own on the open road where, despite its
stretched proportions, it is surprisingly athletic. It is designed for long distance driving.
The ride set-up is focused on comfort, the standard rear-axle air suspension
with automatic self-levelling a standard feature. Two-axle air suspension,
dynamic damper control, active roll stabilisation and integral active steering
are optional. There is an equal measure of agility, the
pliant suspension tightening when dynamic sport mode is engaged. A sweeping, low-slung aerodynamic body with
active air flap control, air curtains and breathers helps the GT to cut drag
and wind noise, while the automatically extending rear spoiler increases
downforce at the rear to optimise driving dynamics and keep it planted at high
speeds. You’d think given its long wheelbase that the back might venture out on
the twisty bits. But you’d be wrong; it hugs the road. The snarl from the twin chrome exhausts is
heightened in sport mode. Put your right foot down in this mode and the car
catapults forward, even displaying an impressive amount of wheel spin off the
line. Automatic gearing from the 8-speed sport gearbox is faultless, but you
can also peak the revs and performance manually by using the steering-mounted
flappy paddles. This car has loads of power, but because it
is so refined, speed is deceptive (the optional head-up display fitted in the
test car alerting me to this on many an occasion). Piloting this performance grand tourer
beats driving a high-performance sports car on long hauls by a country mile.
The driving experience does not become a fatiguing one, while in contrast,
really high-performance sports machines can be quite taxing to drive and thus
draining over long distances. The test trip took us all the way to the
quaint fishing village of Arniston where fresh fish may be on offer, but fuel
is not. It was a detail I was unaware of and could have run out of fuel. It was
only the 630d’s impressive fuel range and a stint of languid driving in eco mode
to increase the range that prevented what could have been an embarrassing faux
pas. Little did I imagine that driving long
distance, let alone a car of considerable size, would be as relaxed and
enjoyable as it turned out to be. Or as frugal on the pocket. With a combination of “energetic” driving,
a healthy dose of adhering to speed limits, and the odd stint in eco mode
(which allows for speeds of up to 120km/h), the 630d GT managed an impressive
5.8 litres/100km – with a laden boot. The BMW 630d GT is the quintessential
touring car, one that features many elements offered by its executive 7 Series
sibling. It is all things premium. And it is lighter, sportier and more
efficient than its predecessor. It’s no budget buy, but then this four-door
Gran Turismo delivers on luxury, on comfort and space, and on performance and
handling.  This article originally appeared in the 20
December edition of finweek. Buy and download the magazine here or subscribe to our
newsletter here. 